FOCUS #257: FinOps Principles Refresh (#258)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/overview.md

The FOCUS working group will develop an open-source specification for billing data. The schema will define data dimensions, metrics, a set of attributes about billing data, and a common lexicon for describing billing data.

## Design Principles

The following principles were considered while building the specification.

### FOCUS is an iterative, living specification

* Incremental iterations of the specification released on a regular basis will provide higher value to practitioners and allow feedback as the specification develops. The goal is not to get to a complete, finished specification in one pass.

### Working backwards with ease of adoption

> * The FOCUS group working on the specification aims to work backwards from essential FinOps capabilities that practitioners need to perform to prioritize the dimensions, metrics and the attributes of the cost and usage data that should be defined in the specification to fulfill that capability.

Reviewer: Lol... I was just about to suggest that this first bullet should not be a bullet, as it reads more like a summary than a directive -- but I see the resolved comment above.  So, perhaps to put it more in line with the other bullets, format it as follows:
```suggestion
* Aim to work backwards from essential FinOps capabilities that practitioners need to perform to prioritize the dimensions, metrics and the attributes of the cost and usage data that should be defined in the specification to fulfill that capability.
```

* Be FinOps scenario-driven. Define columns that answer scenario questions; don't look for scenarios to fit a column, each column must have a use case.
* Don't add dimensions or metrics to the specification just because it can be added.

> * When defining the specification, consideration should be made to existing data already in the major providers' (AWS, GCP, Azure, OCI) data sources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When defining the specification, consideration should be made to existing data already in the major providers' (AWS, GCP, Azure, OCI) data sets.
```

> * As long as it solves the FinOps use case, there should be a preference to align with data that is already present in a majority of the major providers.

Reviewer 2: I just worry that saying this at the top of the document does two things:
- Makes it harder for us to take this to other providers and other types of providers / cost sources (saas, on-prem) and make the justification that FOCUS is built with the general FinOps needs in mind and not try to force a very cloud specific taxonomy on non-cloud providers.
- Confuses from the working backwards approach we detailed up-top. It would be logical for someone to ask which is it? The reality is that common FinOps capabilities are mostly based on well known CSP cost and usage data sets already. However, if there happens to be something that practitioners really need to do, that major providers aren't enabling today, that's still something that should be prioritized based on the merit of the the use case not based on if majority of the providers have a way to enable this or not. 

Otherwise FOCUS always ends up being the follower that comes in and standardizes the lowest common denominator not the avenue for the FinOps practitioners to drive the requirements for common FInOps needs

Reviewer: Related: upon reading through this second draft, the only big thing that sticks out to me is the contradiction across sections of FOCUS being both provider-neutral and giving preference to major providers.

* Strive for simplicity. However, prioritize accuracy, clarity, and consistency.
* Strive to build columns that serve a single purpose, with clear and concise names and values.
* The specification should allow data to be presented free from jargon, using simple understandable terms, and be approachable.
* Naming and terms used should be carefully considered to avoid using terms for which the definition could be confused by the reader. If a term must be used which has either an unclear or multiple definitions, it should be clarified in the [glossary](#glossary).

> * The specification should provide all of the data elements necessary for the [FinOps capabilities](https://finops.org/framework/capabilities).

Reviewer 2: This link is already available under [FODOFC] (see line 54 & 89)

Author: ```suggestion
* The specification should provide all of the data elements necessary for the [Capabilities][FODOFC].
```

### Provider-neutral approach by default

* While the schema, naming, terminology, and attributes of many providers are reviewed during development, this specification aims to be provider-neutral.
* Contributors must take care to ensure the specification examines how each decision relates to each of the major cloud providers and SaaS vendors, not favoring any single one.
* In some cases, the approach may closely resemble one or more provider's implementation, while in other cases, the approach might be new. In all cases, the FOCUS group (community composed of FinOps practitioners, Cloud and SaaS providers and FinOps vendors) will attempt to prioritize alignment with the FinOps [Framework][FODOF] and [Capabilities][FODOFC].

### Extensibility

* The initial specification aims to introduce a common schema and terminology for billing datasets produced by Cloud Service Providers (CSPs).

> * The specification, however, aims to be extensible to SaaS products and other types of cost datasets.

Reviewer 2: Bit of a chicken and egg problem here. At what point does FOCUS clearly state that SaaS providers should adopt it? Is it at 1.0 since we know it's going to work based on some of the research that was done OR is it some version after 1.0? if it's at 1.0, we should change this line IMO.

Reviewer 3: Without the additional supporting content to assist SaaS vendor adoption ready, stating SaaS should adopt v1.0 seems premature.

Author: At the time a release has extended to cover the SaaS use cases it makes sense to update this line.

* Future versions of the specification will look to expand the content to support a broader set of prioritized FinOps capabilities.

## Design Notes

### Optimize for data analysis

* Optimize columns for data analysis at scale and avoid the requirement of splitting or parsing values.
* Avoid complex JSON structures when an alternative columnar structure is possible.

> * FOCUS should facilitate the inclusion of data necessary for a system of record for cost and usage data to consume.

Reviewer: No need for "FOCUS should" here.  That's implied with all the bullets here.

```suggestion
* Facilitate the inclusion of data necessary for a system of record for cost and usage data to consume.
```

The FOCUS working group will develop an open-source specification for billing data. The schema will define data dimensions, metrics, a set of attributes about billing data, and a common lexicon for describing billing data.

## Design Principles

The following principles were considered while building the specification.

### FOCUS is an iterative, living specification

> The goal is not to get to a complete finish specification in one pass, releasing incremental iterations of the specification will provide value to practitioners and allow feedback as the specification develops.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The goal is not to get to a complete, finished specification in one pass. Releasing incremental iterations of the specification will provide value to practitioners and allow feedback as the specification develops.
```

### Working Backwards

> * The FOCUS group working on the specification aims to work backwards from essential FinOps capabilities that practitioners need to perform to prioritize the dimensions, metrics and the attributes of the billing data that should be defined in the specification to fulfill that capability.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The FOCUS group working on the specification aims to follow these guiding principles:

* Work backwards from essential FinOps capabilities that practitioners need to perform to prioritize the dimensions, metrics and the attributes of the billing data that should be defined in the specification to fulfill that capability.
```

> * The FOCUS group working on the specification aims to work backwards from essential FinOps capabilities that practitioners need to perform to prioritize the dimensions, metrics and the attributes of the billing data that should be defined in the specification to fulfill that capability.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The FOCUS group working on the specification aims to work backwards from essential FinOps capabilities that practitioners need to perform to prioritize the dimensions, metrics and the attributes of the cost and usage data that should be defined in the specification to fulfill that capability.
```

* Be FinOps scenario-driven. Define columns that answer scenario questions; don't look for scenarios to fit a column, each column must have a use case.

> * Don't add data just because we can.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Don't add data just because it can be added.
```

third person voice

### Ease of adoption is important

> * When defining the specification consideration should be made to existing data already in the major providers' data sources.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* When defining the specification, consideration should be made to existing data already in the major providers' data sources.
```

> * As long as it solves the FinOps use case, there should be a preference to align with data that is already present in two of the three major providers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* As long as it solves the FinOps use case, there should be a preference to align with data that is already present in two of the three major providers and generally-applicable to common SaaS-based cost and usage data.
```

> * As long as it solves the FinOps use case, there should be a preference to align with data that is already present in two of the three major providers.

Reviewer 5: If the goal is to expand past cloud cost and usage datasets into SaaS (and even beyond), it seems to limiting to just say 2 of 3 cloud providers

* Strive for Simplicity. However, prioritize Accuracy, Clarity, and Consistency.

> * Columns should have a single responsibility with clear and concise names and values.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Columns should have a single purpose, with clear and concise names and values.
```

> * Data should be human readable, free from jargon, using simple understandable terms, and be approachable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Data should be human-readable, free from jargon, using simple understandable terms, and be approachable.
```

* Naming and terms used should be carefully considered to avoid using terms for which the definition could be confused by the reader, if a term must be used which has either an unclear or multiple definitions it should be clarified in the [glossary](#glossary).

> * The specification should provide all of the data elements necessary for the FinOps capabilities.

Reviewer 6: nit: Is it worth linking to FinOps capabilities for someone who may not be familiar?
```suggestion
* The specification should provide all of the data elements necessary for the [FinOps capabilities](https://finops.org/framework/capabilities).
```

* Contributors must take care to ensure the specification examines how each decision relates to each of the major cloud providers and SaaS vendors, not favoring any one.
* In some cases, the approach may closely resemble one or more provider's implementation, while in other cases, the approach might be new. In all cases, the FOCUS group (community composed of FinOps practitioners, Cloud and SaaS providers and FinOps vendors) will attempt to prioritize alignment with the FinOps [Framework][FODOF] and [Capabilities][FODOFC].

### Extensibility

* The initial specification aims to introduce a common schema and terminology for billing datasets produced by Cloud Service Providers (CSPs).
* The specification however aims to be extensible to SaaS products and other types of cost datasets.
* Future versions of the specification will look to expand the content to support a broader set of prioritized FinOps capabilities.

## Design Notes

### Optimize for data analysis

* Columns should be optimized for data analysis (aggregations and breakdowns) at scale and should not require splitting or parsing.

> * Data that cannot be represented in predefined columns (e.g., tags) should use a simplified JSON object that does not use nested objects and arrays, and is parseable within spreadsheets.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Data that cannot be represented in predefined columns (e.g., tags) should use a simplified JSON object that does not use nested objects and arrays, and is parseable within spreadsheet applications (e.g. Excel, Google Sheets.)
```

Reviewer 6: Period after the parentheses `).`

> * Avoid complex JSON structures for any scenario that requires non-technical personas or has a well-defined structure that could be represented as separate, flat columns.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Avoid complex JSON structures when an alternative columnar structure is possible.
* Avoid creating a technical barrier for parsing and processing any FOCUS data value.
```

* FOCUS should include all data necessary as the system of record for cost and usage data and scenarios that require this dataset.
* Minimize the need for expensive joins at scale for non-technical personas and avoid duplicating data for scenarios that require engineering support where complex joins are more feasible (e.g., forecasting).

### Consistency helps with clarity

> * Where possible use consistent names that will naturally group like data in the specification

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Where possible, use consistent names that will naturally create associations between related columns in the specification.
```

> * Use common patterns to reinforce learning, (e.g. Id dimensions always contain an identifier, Category dimensions are always normalized)

Reviewer 6: Hmm... We should define this in the column naming attribute.
```suggestion
* Use common patterns to reinforce learning (e.g., ID columns always contain an identifier, Category columns are always normalized).
```

Author: That sounds like the right approach. I will look at that section

> * Use well established standards (e.g. ISO8601 for dates, ISO4217 for currency)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Use established standards (e.g., ISO8601 for dates, ISO4217 for currency).
```

The FOCUS working group will develop an open-source specification for billing data. The schema will define data dimensions, metrics, a set of attributes about billing data, and a common lexicon for describing billing data.

## Design Principles

The following principles were considered while building the specification.

### FOCUS is an iterative, living specification

> The goal is not to get to a complete, finished specification in one pass. Releasing incremental iterations of the specification will provide value to practitioners and allow feedback as the specification develops.

Reviewer: I would love for this section to start with a positive statement, not a negative one.  Something like:

```suggestion
Incremental iterations of the specification released on a regular basis will provide higher value to practitioners and allow feedback as the specification develops. The goal is not to get to a complete, finished specification in one pass. 
```

I know that's less snappy, but there's more warm fuzzies, which I think is important this early on in the doc.

> ### Working Backwards

Author: ```suggestion
### Working backwards
```

> * The FOCUS group working on the specification aims to work backwards from essential FinOps capabilities that practitioners need to perform to prioritize the dimensions, metrics and the attributes of the cost and usage data that should be defined in the specification to fulfill that capability.

Author: Fixed up

* Be FinOps scenario-driven. Define columns that answer scenario questions; don't look for scenarios to fit a column, each column must have a use case.
* Don't add data just because it can be added.

### Ease of adoption is important

> * When defining the specification, consideration should be made to existing data already in the major providers' data sources.

Reviewer: Who are the "major providers"?  (I know the answer, of course... but the document doesn't appear to make any declaration about this.  It assumes the reader already knows.)  While I can respect the sensitive nature of the exercise, I think it would be worth defining this term.

> * When defining the specification, consideration should be made to existing data already in the major providers' data sources.

Author: ```suggestion
* When defining the specification, consideration should be made to existing data already in the major providers' (AWS, GCP, Azure, OCI) data sources.
```

* As long as it solves the FinOps use case, there should be a preference to align with data that is already present in a majority of the major providers.

> * Strive for Simplicity. However, prioritize Accuracy, Clarity, and Consistency.

Reviewer: Capitalizing these reinforces their importance for sure -- but to me, it feels out of step with the style of the rest of the doc.

> * Strive for Simplicity. However, prioritize Accuracy, Clarity, and Consistency.

Author: ```suggestion
* Strive for simplicity. However, prioritize accuracy, clarity, and consistency.
```

* Columns should have a single purpose, with clear and concise names and values.
* Data should be human-readable, free from jargon, using simple understandable terms, and be approachable.
* Naming and terms used should be carefully considered to avoid using terms for which the definition could be confused by the reader. If a term must be used which has either an unclear or multiple definitions, it should be clarified in the [glossary](#glossary).
* The specification should provide all of the data elements necessary for the FinOps capabilities.

> ### Provider-Neutral Approach by Default

Reviewer: Some principles such as these are All Caps; others (e.g. "Ease of adoption is important") only capitalize the First word.  Consider harmonizing those.

> ### Provider-Neutral Approach by Default

Author: ```suggestion
### Provider-neutral approach by default
```

* While the schema, naming, terminology, and attributes of many providers are reviewed during development, this specification aims to be provider-neutral.

> * Contributors must take care to ensure the specification examines how each decision relates to each of the major cloud providers and SaaS vendors, not favoring any one.

Reviewer: This feels out of step with the previous section, which implies that the "major providers" get preference of consideration.

* In some cases, the approach may closely resemble one or more provider's implementation, while in other cases, the approach might be new. In all cases, the FOCUS group (community composed of FinOps practitioners, Cloud and SaaS providers and FinOps vendors) will attempt to prioritize alignment with the FinOps [Framework][FODOF] and [Capabilities][FODOFC].

### Extensibility

* The initial specification aims to introduce a common schema and terminology for billing datasets produced by Cloud Service Providers (CSPs).
* The specification, however, aims to be extensible to SaaS products and other types of cost datasets.
* Future versions of the specification will look to expand the content to support a broader set of prioritized FinOps capabilities.

## Design Notes

### Optimize for data analysis

> * Columns should be optimized for data analysis (aggregations and breakdowns) at scale and should not require splitting or parsing.

Reviewer: Currently, the bullet points in this section are a mixture of commands to the designer (starting with a verb) and statements about the data (normal sentence); consider standardizing to one or the other.

* Data that cannot be represented in predefined columns (e.g., tags) should use a simplified JSON object that does not use nested objects and arrays, and is parseable within spreadsheet applications (e.g. Excel, Google Sheets.)
* Avoid complex JSON structures when an alternative columnar structure is possible.
* Avoid creating a technical barrier for parsing and processing any FOCUS data value.

> * FOCUS should include all data necessary as the system of record for cost and usage data and scenarios that require this dataset.

Reviewer 2: Not too sure about the current line or my suggestion but throwing out ideas to see if this can be clear. I think as it stands currently, it has little to no boundaries (like saying FOCUS should be everything people want out of cost and usage - which is very subjective) - which is why i like binding it to FinOps capabilities

```suggestion
* FOCUS should facilitate the inclusion of data necessary for a system of record for cost and usage data to consume.
```

> * Minimize the need for expensive joins at scale for non-technical personas and avoid duplicating data for scenarios that require engineering support where complex joins are more feasible (e.g., forecasting).

Reviewer: The two sections of this sentence feel contradictory to me.  If that is the very point of the sentence, then perhaps it could be more explicit.  Like:
```suggestion
* Minimize the need for expensive joins at scale for non-technical personas while also avoiding the duplication of data for scenarios that require engineering support where complex joins are more feasible (e.g., forecasting).
```

### Consistency helps with clarity

* Where possible, use consistent names that will naturally create associations between related columns in the specification.

> * Use common patterns to reinforce learning, (e.g. Id dimensions always contain an identifier, Category dimensions are always normalized)

Reviewer: Need a period here and at the end of line 80 too.   More importantly: is there a section of the doc that defines such patterns/conventions?  "Category dimensions are always normalized" seems an important statement that deserves a non-parenthetical declaration; perhaps such items merit their own section?

Reviewer: This section looks good now!
